just before we get started I want to say
sorry to all of you in the US who tried
to preorder my book that's coming out in
a couple of weeks you should never have
been able to pre-order from Amazon code
at UK in the first place that was an
error on the publishers part and I'm
really sorry about that
don't worry though that is a big
announcement coming soon about my book
over in North America which I am very
excited about I'm tight though until
then you'll be able to get your hands in
the book eventually just like the UK
peas boiled into each time but anyway
let's get on with this month night sky
news and let's start as always by
looking ahead to what we can see in the
night sky in the next coming month so I
hope that most of you managed to spot
some meteors in the Perseids meteor
shower this month I know I did I was on
holiday at midnight still lying on the
Sun bed around the pool but this time
looking up at this sky star bathing if
you will and I want you to spot about
three or four of them just the four
peaks of early August time which was
really good fun if you did get any
pictures of them wherever you saw them
please send them to me on Twitter or
Instagram or whatever send them to me
I'd love to see them so the very early
morning of the 25th and 26th of August
very thin crescent moon is me wind my
collection of stars that we know as the
winter hexagon all season astronomers
all know that the winter hexing really
is a solid fixture in northern
hemisphere skies in the winter and
apparently now the end of August is the
start of winter because it's just
starting to rise winter is coming and as
the months march on it will rise earlier
and earliest that we can see it earlier
in the night so that you know by sort of
December January in the evening sky it's
a very firm fixture so the winter
hexagon is made of six of the brightest
stars in the winter sky and with the
crescent moon back smack in the middle
of them it should be really easy to spot
which ones those are so I would suggest
doing is start by finding a Ryan's belt
which really close to the moon could
down from there and he hit one of
Orion's feet essentially riedel it's
very bright blue star so from Rigel you
then want to follow the hex skin
first of all down to serious in the
southwest the dog star then you want to
go up to kion I have no idea if I'm
pronouncing that correctly
wolf I know from pucon head up to Pollux
in Gemini which is one of the twin stars
castor and Pollux from there head over
to capella which is the top of the
hexagon back down to Alda Brown which
will be just above a Ryan it's the sort
of red star in the bull Taurus and then
back down to Rigel will complete the
Wintec skin
then on the evenings of the 5th and 7th
of September you again get to use the
moon to spot things but this time
Jupiter and Saturn's is gonna be in
between Jupiter and Saturn on this sky
it's gonna start off as like a half moon
and then move so the other cross the sky
and get bigger and it'll move from
Jupiter to Saturn over the evenings so
it's gonna be easy to spot them Jupiter
is gonna be the brightest thing in the
sky so to the right of the moon and then
Saturn it'll be the next brightest thing
to left the moon you can't confuse them
for Venus at this time because Venus is
usually the brightest thing in the sky
but it's actually too close to the Sun
for us to see it at the minute so if you
look out on those evenings and you see
those two bright what look like stars
next the moon know that you're actually
seeing Jupiter and Saturn then on the
20th of September in the evening we
again get to use the moon to find
something cool in the sky
it'll be just past full this time but
look for it look just slightly above it
and you should find the Clyde YZ star
cluster so with the naked eye this looks
like a cluster of six to eight stars
depending on how good your eyes are
really can get binoculars or a telescope
on it you'll see so much more it kind of
looks to me like a sort of mini plough
or really big dipper a little bit when
you see it with the naked eye and it's
just a really nice thing to spot in the
sky all right so now we know what to
look for this month in the night sky
let's turn our gaze instead to what's
been happening in space news this month
[Applause]
so there's a paper that came out at the
end of July that actually made
mainstream news and thank you to all of
you that actually sent me the story on
Twitter because it came out just as I
filmed my video about why we can't see
the center of the Milky Way from the
Northern Hemisphere probably and at the
beginning of the video I said - the
Milky Way is like a flat disc which
according to this paper I can no longer
say because what this paper found it's
actually the Milky Way's galactic disc
is slightly warped I get sort of weirdly
shaped towards the edges so how they
manage to figure that out is really
interesting what they try to do is make
sort of a 3d map of stars in our Milky
Way which you think sounds pretty easy
you mark the positions in the sky but
what you don't have is very accurate
distances to those stars however there
is a very specific type of star that you
can get accurate distances for and
they're called Cepheid variables they're
variable stars they pulse in their
brightness on some timescale so they
might pulse every day or so every two
days but what we know about these stars
is that how much their brightness
changes is directly proportional to
their time scale of their pulsation so
how often they actually pulse what we
call their period of their pulsations so
if we can measure how often the star
pulses we know what its actual
brightness is and then what we do is we
compare it with the apparent brightness
that we observe on earth it will be
dimmed because we're seeing it from very
far away and then we can work out well
how far had that like travel to dim that
much so we know the distance to those
stars to do that though you have to find
these stars which is a lot easier said
than done because you have to look for
when things are actually changing in the
sky there's a lot of things that change
in the sky stuff moves on the sky like
planets and asteroids and comets in our
own solar system there's you know
supernova going off there's different
types of variable stars as well so it's
very difficult to find them so before
this paper came out we actually only
knew of just over a thousand seven
variables in our galaxy the Milky Way
and what they've managed to do here is
actually conduct a specific search for
these stars in an experiment that's
actually looking for lots of different
things and they've managed to find 2431
new set of variables in the milky way to
get accurate distances for them that's
on a double what we knew previously so
if you combine all those separate
variables and all the distances that you
know have you can get quite a cool map
of stars and their legs away and we see
you assume the separate variables trace
the rest of the stars in the galaxy
which is a reasonable assumption they're
not sort of a star that you find having
formed in a very special conditions you
just find them where lots of other stars
have also formed so I didn't do with all
this is make this map and you can kind
of see from the 3d map that it is
slightly war for what really shows you
that it's warped is when you plot the
height above the disk
you like the z axis you know you've got
like X Y and then like Zed going upwards
with the radius in the galaxies outwards
and what they've also done is is plot
that sort of for how far around you are
in the galaxy and angle that they call
Phi and they've shown that you can
really see that it's not flat as you go
further out in the galaxy it does warp
to these different heights above the
disks at various different radii in the
galaxy so it's really interesting to see
that with these shepherds and yes
they've assumed that they trace the rest
of the star population and hopefully
we'll be able to confirm that when the
results come out from the Gaia mission
which is observing something like a
billion stars in our galaxy to get all
the proper motions and distances really
accurately so we'll have to wait and see
if the guy results also find the same
thing so sticking in the Milky Way
galaxy for now but instead of the sort
of stars around us I'm going to turn
your attention to the supermassive black
hole in the center I'm May 13th this
year a group of astronomers were up
using the telescope on Mauna Kea in
Hawaii and they reason the Keck
telescopes to observe the center of the
Milky Way in infrared light and the
first image they got down at the
beginning of the night they were really
confused because there is this massive
right point source of light in the
center where there shouldn't be a bright
point source of light they're really
confused they're like oh is that like
the star that's going around the center
of the Milky Way they're really famous
one that like loops around really
quickly and proves that there's a black
hole in the center and they're like no
no cuz that's over there in the image so
what is that and they quickly realized
that that was actually at the position
where we think the black hole is at the
center of the Milky Way which was
intriguing so they kept observing it
over the next couple of hours and they
observed that bright point source fading
away what it observed there was
variability in the amount of matter that
the actual black hole in the central
Milky Way was accreting towards it so
all active black holes that are
currently growing inside an ET material
they have what we call an accretion disk
around them of this material spiraling
inwards towards the black hole because
it's going so fast that material then
heats up it starts to glow and give off
x-rays and radio waves from various
different other processes and then also
obviously infrared and so that's what
they'd spotted here well they couldn't
explain was why all of a sudden it was
that much brighter that presumably had
been more matter that had fallen onto
that accretion disk to increase that
brightness so much and then for it to
dim again as well they even pointed out
that it was probably brighter than that
before they actually started observing
it and they actually caught it when it
was dimming back down again
but the brightness that they observed
out was 75 times brighter than it
normally is so the questions were is the
black hole at the center of the Milky
Way showing increased activity and if it
is how long will this period of
increased activity last so these
findings were finally published in a
paper this month by twan doe and
collaborators and they try to address
all of these questions in the paper
first one being how likely was this
variability as well so I was chatting to
one and he said that one of the grad
students Jewish n actually went through
20 years worth and historic observations
of the bottle or the center of the Milky
Way trying to get up the brightness and
the variability for it and trying to
determine you know how light
was this sudden increase in brightness
think it was highly unlikely they worked
out the probability that it would have
this much variability in a single night
with less than 0.3 percent there's a
couple of possibilities as to what could
have caused this sudden increase in
brightness one of them is that it could
be to do with that star at the very
center of the galaxies it takes like 10
years to orbit this black hole it could
be the material from That star as some
have been disturbed and ended up falling
onto the black hole or some of you will
remember that there was actually a very
exciting time about four or five years
ago when astronomers thought that a gas
cloud was going to get accreted by this
black hole it was going very very close
to the black hole and it ended up being
not that exciting it just sort of was a
little flyby of the gas essentially it
just kind of got a little bit disturbed
by the gravity of the black hole but it
sort of then went on its way and people
are expecting sort of like fireworks big
variability and seeing the flare of this
black hole
so what Tuan donor's collaborated
suggested was that actually that
material could have been delayed in
getting to the black hole and what only
just now seeing that material fall in
and be accreted by the black hole but we
will need to monitor this further and so
get lots of different observations
across all the different wavelengths of
light to try and figure out what was
going on here and maybe if it's going to
flare again and try and figure out what
process is responsible is it the star is
it the gas cloud or is it something else
entirely
remember exhaust all other possibilities
before anybody even suggests that it's
aliens a little bit closer to home now
and the European Space Agency and the
Russian space agency have a mission to
Mars planned for next year launch in
something like July 2020 and it's gonna
be taking pieces rosalind Franklin River
to explore Mars and then also the
Russian has a chalk lambda to do that
though you obviously have to get them to
the Martian surface somehow which means
facing be seven minutes of hell there's
been dubbed the seven minute descent
through the Martian atmosphere of the
very top of the atmosphere to the
surface
any craft you put through that is going
to heat up to immense temperatures it's
gonna have huge forces on a
gravitational AeroSystems friction it's
going to be accelerated to incredibly
high speeds so somehow you have to make
it survive that but then also slow it
down so that it can land very nicely on
the surface and so the way that people
do that is with parachutes so before you
go you have got to test those parachutes
you're going to use to the nines to make
sure that they are working so that's
what they were doing this month in
Sweden with sort of like a dummy weight
to represent the rover in the lander and
they dropped it from sitting like 29 and
kilometres about 18 miles up and
unfortunately that test must crashed
into the surface at high speed and it
was because there was somehow a tear in
the parachute when it deployed and so it
didn't provide in a drag to actually
slow that test weight down or the weight
of the rover and the London and so if
that had been the real mission the rover
and London would have been completely
lost so it's very important that we
figure out what is going on with these
parachutes and what's causing them to
tear on release because they've only got
another couple of tests planned for
these parachutes coming up and if
they're not ready by a proposal and date
next year they're gonna have to wait
until 2022 which is the next launch
window when Earth and Mars are sort of
positioned appropriately to sort of have
a short journey to Mars so here's hoping
that they manage to figure out what's
wrong before that time and now a fun
thing to finish on all to do with Pluto
everyone's favorite dwarf planet so
before the New Horizons mission did the
flyby back in 2015 the best image we had
of Pluto was from the Hubble Space
Telescope and it left a lot to be
desired let's put it that way so because
it was so fuzzy we didn't really know
anything about the surface of Pluto and
not knowing anything about the surface
of Pluto means you don't have to name
anything on the surface over Pluto but
after the New Horizons mission that all
change because all of a sudden we had
these super detailed images showing
mountains and valleys and lake beds and
all of these features that all of a
sudden we needed to be able to refer to
so that people were
getting confused that they were
referring for the same features because
they've been called various different
things in different academic papers and
so this is where the IAU comes in the
International Astronomical Union they
are basically responsible for naming
anything in space they're responsible
for keeping it standardized and making
sure that everyone knows what everyone
is talking about and that there is an
actual system in place so remember if
you're in store online and you see
anything claiming to be one of these
kits where you can name a star after a
loved one or loved pet whatever it might
be it is absolutely false it will not be
officially recognized at all you haven't
actually named the star you're just
wasting your money is essentially fraud
so please don't fall for it
so the IAU are sticklers for making sure
that whatever you're naming it makes
sense in the context so for example our
Mars a lot of all the features are named
after something to do with war because
Mars was the Roman god of war
so if anything's doing war in mythology
or even generals of wars on earth as
well so Pluto was the god of the
underworld in Roman mythology pulled
from the Greek which is probably why
you'll know the name better of Hades so
a list of categories for Pluto includes
names for the underworld from all of the
worlds mythology gods goddesses and
Dwarfs associated with the underworld
heroes and other explorers at the
underworld writers associated with Pluto
and the Quaker Belt and scientists and
engineers associated with Pluto and the
Kuiper belt and then also just general
explorers on earth as well because sort
of Pluto is seen as sort of the edge of
sort of the horrible solar system and so
people who sort of pushed the boundary
of exploration so for example we now
have the alcio nyan lake which was a
lake in greek mythology which was really
entrances to the underworld we also have
a window fossae which is an engine hero
from Congo who travelled to the
underworld
we have pickguard Mons but not that
picard he was a 20th century inventor
known for his upper atmosphere balloon
flights then we got right Mons which is
a mountain named in honor of the Wright
brothers the first people to hit those
fly
in a plane and then also the ciminelli
crater which is named after a Dutch
astronomer who spent a life researching
the formation of Pluto what I love is
they've also gone one step further
because Pluto also has five moons as
well one of those is chyron which is
kind of like the same size of Pluto and
actually they're in kind of like a
binary orbit which is one of the reasons
that Pluto isn't really considered a
planet anymore because it hasn't cleared
out its orbit because it's sort of like
two planets in a way but they've also
said well if you're going to name things
on any of Pluto's moons then they have
to be named after these various things
so for example if you're going to name
something on Charen it has to be named
after either destinations and milestones
of fictional space and other exploration
or fictional and mythological voyages
travelers and explorers or fictional and
mythological vessels of space and other
exploration so I am now pushing to get
serenity crater named on Sharon Emily
phenom and similarly Styx is named after
River guards Nix is deities of the night
deities of the night whatever they are
Kerberos you've also got like dogs from
literature mythology in histories so I'm
secretly hoping for like a hooch Tara
but Savoy and then Hydra legendary
serpents and Dragons so mu shu Mons
doesn't exist already
it should they don't look at me I ain't
bad no more but I you hear me I will
campaign for this this is the hill that
I will die on you need to calm down
black holes like I do laughs what does
that make sense Becky and it's gonna
take the European Roslyn Franklin Robo
to explore Mars and then also Russia's
Gorbachev come on the choppers made that
up cuz a chalk has a TRO cut a truck has
a truck but after the New Horizons
mission that all changed because all of
a sudden we had these super detailed
images images images I've no idea what I
just said but I knew it wasn't right
died again as
this is where the International
astronomer and so this is where the
International astronomy
so this is where the International
Astronomical Union why could I not say
that
they are kind of like the police of all
things names in the solar system they're
the only ones with the earth not in the
solar system in there I mean it was tiny
let's do and is essentially fraud like
the IAU refers to it as Charlotte ray
Charlotte ray Charlotte ray Charlotte
Henry why can't I pronounce Charlotte
Chenery hum pronounce anything today
sharland tree Charlotte Henry Charlotte
Andrey Charlatans room weenie I you have
come out and essentially said it's
Charlotte in rate like it's fraud I've
done it again Charlotte don't we did it
by that time charlatan read Hey
you